Documentation/core-api/protection-keys.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

======================
Memory Protection Keys
======================

Memory Protection Keys provide a mechanism for enforcing page-based
protections, but without requiring modification of the page tables
when an application changes protection domains.

PKeys Userspace (PKU) is a feature which is found on Intel's Skylake "Scalable
Processor" Server CPUs and later.  And it will be available in future
non-server Intel parts and future AMD processors.

Protection Keys for Supervisor pages (PKS) is available in the SDM since May
2020.

pkeys work by dedicating 4 previously Reserved bits in each page table entry to
a "protection key", giving 16 possible keys.  User and Supervisor pages are
treated separately.

Protections for each page are controlled with per-CPU registers for each type
of page User and Supervisor.  Each of these 32-bit register stores two separate
bits (Access Disable and Write Disable) for each key.

For Userspace the register is user-accessible (rdpkru/wrpkru).  For
Supervisor, the register (MSR_IA32_PKRS) is accessible only to the kernel.

Being a CPU register, pkeys are inherently thread-local, potentially giving
each thread an independent set of protections from every other thread.

There are two new instructions (RDPKRU/WRPKRU) for reading and writing
to the new register.  The feature is only available in 64-bit mode,
even though there is theoretically space in the PAE PTEs.  These
permissions are enforced on data access only and have no effect on
instruction fetches.

For kernel space rdmsr/wrmsr are used to access the kernel MSRs.


Syscalls for user space keys
============================

There are 3 system calls which directly interact with pkeys::

	int pkey_alloc(unsigned long flags, unsigned long init_access_rights)
	int pkey_free(int pkey);
	int pkey_mprotect(unsigned long start, size_t len,
			  unsigned long prot, int pkey);

Before a pkey can be used, it must first be allocated with
pkey_alloc().  An application calls the WRPKRU instruction
directly in order to change access permissions to memory covered
with a key.  In this example WRPKRU is wrapped by a C function
called pkey_set().
::

	int real_prot = PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE;
	pkey = pkey_alloc(0, PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE);
	ptr = mmap(NULL, PAGE_SIZE, PROT_NONE, MAP_ANONYMOUS|MAP_PRIVATE, -1, 0);
	ret = pkey_mprotect(ptr, PAGE_SIZE, real_prot, pkey);
	... application runs here

Now, if the application needs to update the data at 'ptr', it can
gain access, do the update, then remove its write access::

	pkey_set(pkey, 0); // clear PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE
	*ptr = foo; // assign something
	pkey_set(pkey, PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE); // set PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE again

Now when it frees the memory, it will also free the pkey since it
is no longer in use::

	munmap(ptr, PAGE_SIZE);
	pkey_free(pkey);

.. note:: pkey_set() is a wrapper for the RDPKRU and WRPKRU instructions.
          An example implementation can be found in
          tools/testing/selftests/x86/protection_keys.c.

Behavior
========

The kernel attempts to make protection keys consistent with the
behavior of a plain mprotect().  For instance if you do this::

	mprotect(ptr, size, PROT_NONE);
	something(ptr);

you can expect the same effects with protection keys when doing this::

	pkey = pkey_alloc(0, PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE | PKEY_DISABLE_READ);
	pkey_mprotect(ptr, size, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE, pkey);
	something(ptr);

That should be true whether something() is a direct access to 'ptr'
like::

	*ptr = foo;

or when the kernel does the access on the application's behalf like
with a read()::

	read(fd, ptr, 1);

The kernel will send a SIGSEGV in both cases, but si_code will be set
to SEGV_PKERR when violating protection keys versus SEGV_ACCERR when
the plain mprotect() permissions are violated.


Kernel API for PKS support
==========================

Similar to user space pkeys, supervisor pkeys allow additional protections to
be defined for a supervisor mappings.  Unlike user space pkeys, violations of
these protections result in a a kernel oops.

Supervisor Memory Protection Keys (PKS) is a feature which is found on Intel's
Sapphire Rapids (and later) "Scalable Processor" Server CPUs.  It will also be
available in future non-server Intel parts.

Also qemu has some support as well: https://www.qemu.org/2021/04/30/qemu-6-0-0/

Kernel users intending to use PKS support should depend on
ARCH_HAS_SUPERVISOR_PKEYS, and add their config to ARCH_ENABLE_SUPERVISOR_PKEYS
to turn on this support within the core.

Users reserve a key value by adding an entry to the enum pks_pkey_consumers and
defining the initial protections in the consumer_defaults[] array.

For example to configure a key for 'MY_FEATURE' with a default of Write
Disabled.

::

        enum pks_pkey_consumers
        {
	        PKS_KEY_DEFAULT,
	        PKS_KEY_MY_FEATURE,
	        PKS_KEY_NR_CONSUMERS
        }

        ...
        consumer_defaults[PKS_KEY_DEFAULT]     = 0;
        consumer_defaults[PKS_KEY_MY_FEATURE]  = PKR_DISABLE_WRITE;
        ...

The following interface is used to manipulate the 'protection domain' defined
by a pkey within the kernel.  Setting a pkey value in a supervisor PTE adds
this additional protection to the page.

::

        #define PAGE_KERNEL_PKEY(pkey)
        #define _PAGE_KEY(pkey)
        bool pks_enabled(void);
        void pks_mk_noaccess(int pkey);
        void pks_mk_readonly(int pkey);
        void pks_mk_readwrite(int pkey);
        void pks_abandon_protections(int pkey);

pks_enabled() allows users to know if PKS is configured and available on the
current running system.

Kernel users must set the pkey in the page table entries for the mappings they
want to protect.  This can be done with PAGE_KERNEL_PKEY() or _PAGE_KEY().

The pks_mk*() family of calls allow indinvidual threads to change the
protections for the domain identified by the pkey parameter.  3 states are
available: pks_mk_noaccess(), pks_mk_readonly(), and pks_mk_readwrite() which
set the access to none, read, and read/write respectively.

The interface sets Access Disabled for all keys not in use.  The
pks_abandon_protections() call reduces the protections for the specified key to
be fully accessible thus abandoning the protections of the key.  There is no
way to reverse this.  As such pks_abandon_protections() is intended to provide
a 'relief valve' if the PKS protections should prove too restrictive.

It should be noted that the underlying WRMSR(MSR_IA32_PKRS) is not serializing
but still maintains ordering properties similar to WRPKRU.  Thus it is safe to
immediately use a mapping when the pks_mk*() functions return.

Older versions of the SDM on PKRS may be wrong with regard to this
serialization.  The text should be the same as that of WRPKRU.  From the WRPKRU
text:

	WRPKRU will never execute transiently. Memory accesses
	affected by PKRU register will not execute (even transiently)
	until all prior executions of WRPKRU have completed execution
	and updated the PKRU register.

Commit message:

x86/pks: Add PKS Test code
The core PKS functionality provides an interface for kernel users to
reserve a key and set up page tables with that key.

Define test code under CONFIG_PKS_TEST which exercises the core
functionality of PKS via a debugfs entry.  Basic checks can be triggered
on boot with a kernel command line option while both basic and
preemption checks can be triggered with separate debugfs values.  [See
the comment at the top of pks_test.c for details on the values which can
be used and what tests they run.]

CONFIG_PKS_TEST enables ARCH_ENABLE_SUPERVISOR_PKEYS but can not
co-exist with any GENERAL_PKS_USER.  This is because the test code
iterates through all the keys and is pretty much not useful in general
kernel configs.  General PKS users should select GENERAL_PKS_USER which
will disable PKS_TEST as well as enable ARCH_ENABLE_SUPERVISOR_PKEYS.

A PKey is not reserved for this test and the test code defines its own
PKS_KEY_PKS_TEST.

To test pks_abandon_protections() each test requires the thread to be
re-run after resetting the abandoned mask value.  Do this by allowing
the test code access to the abandoned mask value.

Co-developed-by: Fenghua Yu <fenghua.yu@intel.com>
Signed-off-by: Fenghua Yu <fenghua.yu@intel.com>
Signed-off-by: Ira Weiny <ira.weiny@intel.com>
Link: https://lore.kernel.org/r/20210804043231.2655537-12-ira.weiny@intel.com

Documentation/core-api/protection-keys.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

======================
Memory Protection Keys
======================

Memory Protection Keys provide a mechanism for enforcing page-based
protections, but without requiring modification of the page tables
when an application changes protection domains.

PKeys Userspace (PKU) is a feature which is found on Intel's Skylake "Scalable
Processor" Server CPUs and later.  And it will be available in future
non-server Intel parts and future AMD processors.

Protection Keys for Supervisor pages (PKS) is available in the SDM since May
2020.

pkeys work by dedicating 4 previously Reserved bits in each page table entry to
a "protection key", giving 16 possible keys.  User and Supervisor pages are
treated separately.

Protections for each page are controlled with per-CPU registers for each type
of page User and Supervisor.  Each of these 32-bit register stores two separate
bits (Access Disable and Write Disable) for each key.

For Userspace the register is user-accessible (rdpkru/wrpkru).  For
Supervisor, the register (MSR_IA32_PKRS) is accessible only to the kernel.

Being a CPU register, pkeys are inherently thread-local, potentially giving
each thread an independent set of protections from every other thread.

There are two new instructions (RDPKRU/WRPKRU) for reading and writing
to the new register.  The feature is only available in 64-bit mode,
even though there is theoretically space in the PAE PTEs.  These
permissions are enforced on data access only and have no effect on
instruction fetches.

For kernel space rdmsr/wrmsr are used to access the kernel MSRs.


Syscalls for user space keys
============================

There are 3 system calls which directly interact with pkeys::

	int pkey_alloc(unsigned long flags, unsigned long init_access_rights)
	int pkey_free(int pkey);
	int pkey_mprotect(unsigned long start, size_t len,
			  unsigned long prot, int pkey);

Before a pkey can be used, it must first be allocated with
pkey_alloc().  An application calls the WRPKRU instruction
directly in order to change access permissions to memory covered
with a key.  In this example WRPKRU is wrapped by a C function
called pkey_set().
::

	int real_prot = PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE;
	pkey = pkey_alloc(0, PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE);
	ptr = mmap(NULL, PAGE_SIZE, PROT_NONE, MAP_ANONYMOUS|MAP_PRIVATE, -1, 0);
	ret = pkey_mprotect(ptr, PAGE_SIZE, real_prot, pkey);
	... application runs here

Now, if the application needs to update the data at 'ptr', it can
gain access, do the update, then remove its write access::

	pkey_set(pkey, 0); // clear PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE
	*ptr = foo; // assign something
	pkey_set(pkey, PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE); // set PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE again

Now when it frees the memory, it will also free the pkey since it
is no longer in use::

	munmap(ptr, PAGE_SIZE);
	pkey_free(pkey);

.. note:: pkey_set() is a wrapper for the RDPKRU and WRPKRU instructions.
          An example implementation can be found in
          tools/testing/selftests/x86/protection_keys.c.

Behavior
========

The kernel attempts to make protection keys consistent with the
behavior of a plain mprotect().  For instance if you do this::

	mprotect(ptr, size, PROT_NONE);
	something(ptr);

you can expect the same effects with protection keys when doing this::

	pkey = pkey_alloc(0, PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE | PKEY_DISABLE_READ);
	pkey_mprotect(ptr, size, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE, pkey);
	something(ptr);

That should be true whether something() is a direct access to 'ptr'
like::

	*ptr = foo;

or when the kernel does the access on the application's behalf like
with a read()::

	read(fd, ptr, 1);

The kernel will send a SIGSEGV in both cases, but si_code will be set
to SEGV_PKERR when violating protection keys versus SEGV_ACCERR when
the plain mprotect() permissions are violated.


Kernel API for PKS support
==========================

Similar to user space pkeys, supervisor pkeys allow additional protections to
be defined for a supervisor mappings.  Unlike user space pkeys, violations of
these protections result in a a kernel oops.

Supervisor Memory Protection Keys (PKS) is a feature which is found on Intel's
Sapphire Rapids (and later) "Scalable Processor" Server CPUs.  It will also be
available in future non-server Intel parts.

Also qemu has some support as well: https://www.qemu.org/2021/04/30/qemu-6-0-0/

Kernel users intending to use PKS support should depend on
ARCH_HAS_SUPERVISOR_PKEYS, and add their config to GENERAL_PKS_USER to turn on
this support within the core.

Users reserve a key value by adding an entry to the enum pks_pkey_consumers and
defining the initial protections in the consumer_defaults[] array.

For example to configure a key for 'MY_FEATURE' with a default of Write
Disabled.

::

        enum pks_pkey_consumers
        {
	        PKS_KEY_DEFAULT,
	        PKS_KEY_MY_FEATURE,
	        PKS_KEY_NR_CONSUMERS
        }

        ...
        consumer_defaults[PKS_KEY_DEFAULT]     = 0;
        consumer_defaults[PKS_KEY_MY_FEATURE]  = PKR_DISABLE_WRITE;
        ...

The following interface is used to manipulate the 'protection domain' defined
by a pkey within the kernel.  Setting a pkey value in a supervisor PTE adds
this additional protection to the page.

::

        #define PAGE_KERNEL_PKEY(pkey)
        #define _PAGE_KEY(pkey)
        bool pks_enabled(void);
        void pks_mk_noaccess(int pkey);
        void pks_mk_readonly(int pkey);
        void pks_mk_readwrite(int pkey);
        void pks_abandon_protections(int pkey);

pks_enabled() allows users to know if PKS is configured and available on the
current running system.

Kernel users must set the pkey in the page table entries for the mappings they
want to protect.  This can be done with PAGE_KERNEL_PKEY() or _PAGE_KEY().

The pks_mk*() family of calls allow indinvidual threads to change the
protections for the domain identified by the pkey parameter.  3 states are
available: pks_mk_noaccess(), pks_mk_readonly(), and pks_mk_readwrite() which
set the access to none, read, and read/write respectively.

The interface sets Access Disabled for all keys not in use.  The
pks_abandon_protections() call reduces the protections for the specified key to
be fully accessible thus abandoning the protections of the key.  There is no
way to reverse this.  As such pks_abandon_protections() is intended to provide
a 'relief valve' if the PKS protections should prove too restrictive.

It should be noted that the underlying WRMSR(MSR_IA32_PKRS) is not serializing
but still maintains ordering properties similar to WRPKRU.  Thus it is safe to
immediately use a mapping when the pks_mk*() functions return.

Older versions of the SDM on PKRS may be wrong with regard to this
serialization.  The text should be the same as that of WRPKRU.  From the WRPKRU
text:

	WRPKRU will never execute transiently. Memory accesses
	affected by PKRU register will not execute (even transiently)
	until all prior executions of WRPKRU have completed execution
	and updated the PKRU register.

Example code can be found in lib/pks/pks_test.c
